Religion and Intellectual Culture
This research unit examines the interplay between religion, intellectual culture, and everyday life across diverse societies, with a particular focus on the „Muslim world“, and from different disciplinary angles. We study „religion(s)“ both as discursive traditions and as dynamic sets of unifying (but often contested) norms and practices in different kinds of lifeworlds. Our understanding of „intellectual culture“ encompasses a set of historically grown and regionally specific narratives and knowledge-oriented practices that often reflect a specific sense of how to live a meaningful life. These may also be linked to religious traditions as well as (trans)regional social and intellectual histories.

The relations (and tensions) between religious and intellectual world-making are of particular interest and concern for us. As researchers, we embrace diverse methods and biographical, historical, ethnographic, material, textual, comparative and contextualizing approaches. We work with a strong sensitivity for the relevance of different languages and (trans)local conceptual fields and processes of conceptualization. Attention to these aspects feeds into the possibility of overcoming Europhone and Eurocentric scholarship, on the way to a more adequate (regionally underpinned) analytical language that may help to address some of the currently pressing decolonial concerns.

Of particular interest are also the ways in which technological innovations, in recent times especially digitization processes, social media exchanges, and artificial intelligence (AI), as they shape and in turn re-shape human experience on different levels, while they have initially been shaped by it. Some researchers use digital humanities methods and resources, such as text mining, network analysis, and digital archives, to explore these transformations, and push the boundaries of traditional research in the study of religion and intellectual culture.

While our primary focus is on Muslim societies (including Muslim secular positions), our research extends to comparative studies with other religious traditions, including Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, and other endogenous religions. This comparative approach enriches our understanding of how different religions remain of longstanding importance in many regions. Our research challenges assumptions about Muslim societies as particularly "law-abiding" (sharia/law) or “religious” communities. Instead, a perspective on lifeworlds questions this and encourages the study of individual processes of negotiation that determine how religious commitment and conviction, but also knowledge and education, feed into and play out in the practice and navigation of everyday life, in relation to specific (trans)regional aspects of religious orientation and intellectual culture more broadly. Such a perspective, pursued in some of our projects, strengthens a view of the complex dimensions of human meaning-making practices, including attention to a wider and even universal intent and appeal that social actors may attach to them.

Research in our unit explores, in different ways, how religiosity, knowledge, and intellectual practice provide orientation in everyday life. The various ways in which these are mobilized and translated (e.g. into individual and collective life plans and sense-making) are examined in times of continuous decolonization – inter alia with a view to areas of tension with the (secular) state. The dynamics of learning cultures and religious upbringing and education in different social contexts are also of particular interest. Although primarily focused on Muslim contexts, some projects pay attention to secular ways of meaning-making, and to interactions between Muslims and their non-Muslim neighbors. In doing so, they also build on previous ZMO-based research on the comparison between Muslim, Christian, and regionally specific endogenous religious traditions. Some projects examine philosophical and artistic forms of engagement with the world and their respective socio-political contexts. Hereby, one prominent aspect is to study the translocality of these traditions, and the contributions as well as reworkings of local actors.

How are such forms shared, passed on, mediated and appropriated beyond their context of origin? Which historically evolved forms of engagement with the living world or the global political environment have been used? In what way are creative and critical traditions of knowledge continued or transformed, and with what motivations? What dynamics have emerged in these contexts? But also: how do academic and non-academic (organic or integral) intellectual traditions and schools of knowledge in our regions of study influence and enrich each other?  These are some of the questions that will be explored here.


Boko: Europe, Intellectualism and Religiosity in Hausa Context
This project offers some reflections on the concept of boko, focusing on the ways in which it constructs Europe and articulates a critique of both schooling and intellectualism in Hausa contexts in West Africa. Boko is usually associated with the secular, and most importantly, the Euro-secular episteme that imposed itself onto many through a system of thought (modern rationalism), a social practice (school and schooling) and political project (modern state). It is one of those Hausa concepts that emerged within the European colonial context to nurture intellectual culture, trigger emancipatory politics and boost religiosity.


Anthropology (in the North) and Theory (from the South)
This project seeks to re-assess the role(s) and work that a critical anthropology can fulfil and provide, vis-à-vis recent postcolonial critique and decolonial challenges to epistemologies and knowledge production. This is pursued with a view to being based in the global North, and the need to engage more centrally with knowledge, concepts, and intellectual traditions from the global South. In collaborative exchange with colleagues and partners in/from Germany, Africa, and beyond, a particular concern is how engagement with theory and thinkers from ZMO’s regions of research (taking East Africa and the Swahili region as a personal starting point) can re-orient our thinking for shaping more adequate – and less Eurocentric – ways of thinking and conceptualizing the world, and society. Central to this is an engagement in dialogical processes of interdisciplinary and inter-regional exchanges, to reflect upon the tasks of anthropology (and related disciplines), and the particular role that the individual can take on. Conscious of limitations and positionalities, and grounded in specific regional and theoretical expertise, this project seeks to learn from a wide-range of readings and discussions to think constructively for re-orientation.


Mining the Islam West Africa Collection: Mapping Print Culture and Intellectual Networks in Francophone Regions
Building on my previous work with the Islam West Africa Collection (IWAC), this research project uses computational tools and digital humanities (DH) methods to analyse Islamic print culture and networks in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire and Togo. Using "distant reading" techniques – the computational analysis of large collections of texts – I uncover patterns in Islamic intellectual discourse and translocal dynamics.

Drawing on 1,500 Islamic publications from the IWAC (1980-2020), this study traces how Muslim elites shaped public discourse in Francophone West Africa. Using natural language processing (NLP) techniques – including topic modelling, word embeddings, and sentiment analysis – I analyse how religious terms (ummah, Salafism, jihad) and sociopolitical concepts (democracy, laïcité) evolve within Islamic discourse, identifying dominant themes, semantic relations, and emotional resonance. This computational analysis will examine how religiosity intersects with morality and intellectual culture in the region.

Network analysis of the IWAC data will map Islamic networks in Francophone West Africa, focusing on understudied local NGOs and "Islamic Francophonie" networks. By analysing connections between individuals, organisations, and institutions, I examine how French has emerged as a vehicle for Islamic discourse among urban elites. This regional focus, which departs from the typical emphasis on global Arab-Islamic connections, reveals how local Islamic networks evolved in response to social and political change.

By combining these computational approaches with ethnographic fieldwork, I aim to provide a comprehensive understanding that neither method could achieve alone. This innovative synthesis promises new insights into the intellectual history and translocal dynamics of Muslims in Francophone West Africa, and contributes significantly to our understanding of how religiosity interacts with morality, intellectual culture and socio-political issues in this context.


Call to Prayer: Evangelizing in an Arab/Islamic Lifeworld
My current project investigates theological innovations emerging from the Christian/Muslim missionary encounter, broadly defined. Christian missionary work in the Arab region is marked by a practical limit that, as my project investigates, opens up new theologies emerging from precisely this limit. By not having a public missionary apparatus, Christianity in the Arab region differs significantly from Christianity elsewhere in the world in that it is not an outwardly expanding religion. Recent attempts by Arab Christian intellectuals to query this situation has inevitably led to dialogues with and about Islam—the supreme spiritual force in the region. Arab Christian theologians of recent decades have identified this situation as the “contextual theology” of Arab Christianity, in which Islam is the contextual basis in which the various churches of the Arab world operate, much like liberal modernity in the case of Western churches. My project is an anthropological investigation into the Islamic context of present-day Christianity in the region, specifically in Palestine, Lebanon, and Jordan. How is the imperative to proliferate the teachings of Christ reinterpreted by church figures in the context of the Arab world? Because of the challenges of outward expansion, does Arab Christianity expand “internally,” via theological and spiritual resources in dialogue with Islam that are unique to its Arab context? And how does Arabic—the language of the Qur’an—lend a certain distinction to Arab Christianity in its liturgical use?


The 'Omani Enlightenment': Circulation of Ideas and the Cultivation of Critical Thought in the Sultanate of Oman
My postdoctoral research can be understood as a study of intellectual life within the broader context of intensifying cultural globalization, characterized by the increasing circulation of books, ideas, and the intellectuals who act as their carriers. Grounded in ongoing ethnographic fieldwork in the Sultanate of Oman, it addresses two interrelated objectives. First, I investigate the social life of ideas through a materialist framework, focusing on their "exchangeability" within the market of ideas. Ideas, as dual entities embodying both commodities and meanings, are intrinsically tied to the material forms that enable their dissemination. In the specific sociopolitical context of Oman, I analyze the mechanisms that facilitate or hinder the production, circulation, diffusion, and eventual stabilization of ideas and critical theories articulated by Omani intellectuals—ideas that increasingly transcend the monitored territorial sovereignty of the nation-state. Second, I conduct an ethnographic analysis of intellectual practices and cognitive reasoning within majālis (intellectual salons). In particular, I examine what it means for certain Omani intellectuals to attain the status of what they themselves describe as "critical intellectuals." This inquiry centers on the cultivation and acquisition of critical dispositions and debating skills through processes of situated learning and legitimate participation in communities of practice composed of like-minded critical intellectuals. At a more micro-level, I examine how ideas and representations drawn from diverse intellectual or religious traditions are debated, confronted, and at times reflexively appropriated by these intellectuals. Through this dynamic engagement, they construct their ethos as critical intellectuals, employing metacognitive strategies to evaluate reflexively the epistemological status of the representations and ideas they engage with to understand and navigate the world.


In Search of a ‘New Orthodoxy': Islamic Education in Post-Soviet Tatarstan
The study aims to examine who and how control public discourse and form a "New Orthodoxy" in the field of Islam and religious education in the Republic of Tatarstan? How the “Orthodoxy” is shifting in the context of changing religious elites in the Republic (from the end of 1990 till the beginning of 2020-es)? What are the instruments of the state (at the Federal and Republican levels) in its influence on the sphere of religious education and what goals it outlines for itself; how the general direction of the state policy towards centralization and the support of "traditional values" and reliance on conservative circles reflected in the sphere of religious education. And finally how the local religious and secular communities respond to the challenges of the times: for example, the influence of International Islamic movements, policies of the secular state, low religious observance of local Muslims and many others.


Hassan Heshmat – A Decolonial Artist, Then and Now
This project investigates the Werkbiographie of Egyptian sculptor Hassan Heshmat (1920-2006), who rose to national and international recognition in the times of Gamal Abdel Nasser. Hassan Heshmat is considered a pioneer of modern Egyptian art. He was the first Egyptian artist to create artworks in porcelain. He created small figurines with local motifs so that average households could acquire an artwork.

Born in Menoufiya, Hassan Heshmat was a student of the renowned potter, painter, and sculptor of Palestinian origin, Said el Sadr (1909-1986). Heshmat graduated with a diploma in Ceramics from the Centre for Applied Arts at Cairo University in 1938. To earn his living, he continued with a diploma in Art Education in 1954. Subsequently, he went to West Germany for a year to study at the Artistic Porcelain Academy in Selb, graduating in 1958. As the hometown of two internationally renowned porcelain manufacturers, Rosenthal and Hutschenreuther, Selb was already an international hub for students at the time.

His sculptures often reflect themes from rural Egyptian society, the working class, the arts, or ongoing political events, like the crossing of the Suez Canal in 1973 or the killing of 21 missionaries in Congo – a memorial commissioned by the Order of the Holy Cross in Hasselt, Belgium, in 1970. During the era of Hosni Mubarak, Heshmat received the Egyptian state’s Appreciation Award. After his death, his private home, including his workshop with three ceramic kilns, exhibit space, and garden in Ain Shams, was turned into a public museum. Current tours stress the aspect of love and unity between man and woman and the entity of the family in Heshmat’s works. 

Heshmat mastered various materials beyond porcelain, like metal, stone, wood, and clay, and he worked in all sizes between 5cm and ca. 10m. A number of large murals by him can be found in Egypt and around the world. His pieces are sold today on various online platforms (eBay, classified ads, artnet.com, mutualart.com, or etsy), but not much is known about the artist himself. Secondary literature in Arabic is scarce and nearly non-existent in European languages.

The project investigates a history of ideas in his works, including social realism, the democratization of art, neo-pharaonism, and Pop Art. It asks how changing debates about decolonization during his lifetime and today are reflected in his works.


VR Islam? Systems of Sensory Perception in Virtual Reality and the Prospects of Virtual Devotion in Islam
This research raises new and exciting questions about the use of VR technologies in religious devotion and ritual practice. It shows how VR technologies make it possible to render the Sacred tangible and perceptible to the human senses and how that can strengthen affective bonds between human and more-than-human beings in religious life-worlds. On the other hand, it engages with the concerns and fears of religious digital content creators and users, including the fear that interactivity may lead to the “manipulation and distortion of the creed” and “transform religion … into a video game, determined not by God Almighty, but by the choices of the gamer” as well as the concern that immersiveness may result in “overstepping the boundaries of appropriateness and decency” in the relationship between the profane and the Sacred. I survey the opinions of VR content creators and users, revealing that attitudes toward the use of VR in Islamic devotion coincide noticeably with generational and gender divides. I ask what all of this means for the future of religion and VR, sketching in the process new directions in the study of sensory-perceptual systems and immersive experience in VR, the value and virtue of virtual action, and the im/permissibility of virtual interaction in religious contexts and beyond.


World-Making from the 'Margins': Muslim Global Actors from South Asia



Scholarly Ways: Mobility, Knowledge Production and Research Capacity Building Between Europe and the Middle East



Religion in Senegalese Laïcité: Enunciations of the Secular in the Colonial and Developmental State (1840-1980)



Rethinking ‘African Traditional Religion’: Living with Spirits in Asante, Ghana


The Populism of the Precarious: Marginalization, Mobilization, and Mediatization of South Asia’s Religious Minorities


The Contending Political Theologies of Pakistan’s Transnational Islamic Actors: A Comparison of Mainstream Deobandi Discourses and Militant Islamism
This doctoral project seeks to analyse competing political theologies resulting from different interpretations and applications of the influential Sunni-Islamic orientation of Deobandis – within their network of Islamic schools (madrasas), on one side, and by militant Islamist actors associated with the same denomination, on the other. The Deobandi seminary network, following its head school Dārul Uloom Deoband in North India (est. 1866), is a locally dominant system with over 20,000 registered seminaries in Pakistan and a significant translocal outreach through the preaching movement of the Tablighi Jama’at; though it has also inspired militant groupings, notably the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Therefore, academic studies and policy literature are marred with considerable ambiguity with regard to the potential of Deobandi ulamā to opt for violent means. The obscure Deobandi madrassa sector requires deeper academic scrutiny, both for bringing precision to characterizations of Pakistan-based transnational Islamic actors, and for accurately determining their place in the over-all threat spectrum.

Hence, this study aims to understand the contending Deobandi articulations and legitimations of an idealized Islamic order in domestic and international contexts. Pre-existing textual data is utilized that mainly comprises of: fatāwa (religious edicts) and programmatic statements by leading mainstream and radical figures, and the monthly periodical of the official Deobandi madrasa board, Wifāq-ul Madāris. This data will be analysed to establish the divergence and inter-textuality of perspectives regarding tensions over violent rebellions in Muslim polities, ‘jihad’ and relations with non-Muslim polities. The findings will have considerable utility for policy-making aimed at enhancing human security and social cohesion in South Asia, and in regions having diasporic presence of South Asian Muslims.


One party for various Muslims: AIMIM and its Muslim constituents in Hyderabad


Contemporary Moroccan Thought: On Philosophy, Theology, Society, and Culture


Preaching and Teaching: Religiosity, Knowledge and Performance at the Université Abdou Moumouni de Niamey, Niger
This project focuses on religiosity and its manifestations among students and lecturers on the Université Abdou Moumouni campus of Niamey, Niger. It investigates how students and lecturers communicate, learn and teach, in other words, how they interact at university while they live, experience and practice their religion every day. It explores how lecturers and preachers perform their social role, respectively as academic and moral actors of this institution of higher education, but also how students, like an audience, react to what they are told. These actors envision or even embody ideals of life and seek ways to improve the society they're living in. How to achieve and live a righteous, successful, and "Good Life" is a central question for students and the university a crucial place for promoting the right knowledge for people and for the society.

This project seeks to contribute to the anthropology of religion in contemporary West-Africa. It approaches religious manifestations through the lenses of “performance” and “performativity” in order to interrogate the physical, visible, and audible means through which religion establishes itself on university campuses. It also investigates how knowledge is appropriated, considered, passed on, utilized or contested in different contexts by both Salafi and Pentecostals. These religious actors are rather used to qualify broader religious trends that one would find on the campuses. Which spaces does religion occupy or seek to pervade, both physically and mentally? How do religious practices shape campus life? Does religiosity affect academic practice and eventually challenge academic knowledge?

In addition to the written study, this project will produce an ethnographic film that conceptualizes the research within the field of visual anthropology. The film will attempt to give a general account of campus life as well as to portray a few individuals’ lives, and to highlight the performativity of academic and religious practices. This study of social interactions and performances in this sahelian university sheds new light on the relationship between academic knowledge and religious knowledge.


Sufi Fundamentalists: Al-Ahbash transnational Sufi network in Western Europe


Public Theology: The Formation of New Theological Discourse in the Periodical Press of Muslim Tatars in Late Imperial Russia (AvH)