Lives and Ecologies
The research unit Lives and Ecologies studies how humans seek to shape their lives, together with humans and other living beings, under conditions of change, disruption and destruction of ecological and societal resources. How do they search for possibilities of survival, continuity, and good life? How do processes such as mobility and displacement, pollution and biodiversity loss, or wars and conflicts reorder human-environment relations, livelihoods, and intergenerational life trajectories? Research in the unit is organised in two thematic conversations: human-environmental relations, and life trajectories and livelihoods across generations.


Revisions of Rurality: Ecology, Conflict and Violence in a Changing Middle East
Through a focus on examples from Syria’s Afrin and Iraqi Kurdistan’s Duhok regions, this project interrogates the impacts of warfare and violence on rural ecologies in the Middle East. Over the last decades, many parts of the region have suffered from armed conflicts that have impacted human as well as non-human life. From burning crops to cut-down fruit trees, from groundwater polluted by residues of toxic ammunition to pastures turned lethal by unexploded ordnance and mines, years of violence have not only had devastating effects for the human population, but have also caused significant damage to the natural environment. 

The immediacy and suddenness of wounds of war interact with more expansive temporal scales: violent conflicts cause long-lasting ecological effects through pollution, displacement and destruction. They may disrupt older ecological engagements going back decades or even centuries, inscribed in local landscapes, interlinking human and non-human actors. This project draws on past fieldwork on-site, on conversations and interviews with (displaced) residents of the abovementioned regions, and published accounts as well as social media posts and debates to ask: How have conflicts, warfare and violence transformed rural landscapes through changing patterns of land use, cutting forests and trees, or polluting water sources; how have they changed human-environment relations? How have they impacted livestock, vegetation, or wildlife - and how are these transformations experienced, reflected and debated by the affected communities? How do these transformations articulate with older trajectories of economic change, social division or political conflict, and to which extent do they constitute decisive and perhaps irreversible ruptures?

The two regions from which empirical examples are drawn are marked by political rifts that feeds on ethnic(ized) social boundaries, invoking Kurdish struggles for autonomy amidst other (Arab, Turkish) state-building projects. In these contexts, interventions into agrarian practices or land use patterns may be challenged or justified in terms of political or military expediency. Moreover, changing patterns of human-environmental relations may, in these settings, be invested with symbolic significance, as specific crops, lifestyles or practices may rhetorically be associated with ‘tradition’ and thus with particular social (ethnic) identities. Conversely, violent disruptions to rural ways of life may be regarded as jeopardizing not only individual livelihoods, but also as threatening such identities. In these settings, notions of ‘justice’ may come to matter in manifold ways, and are often invoked implicitly rather than explicitly.


The Dream of Stability: Egyptian Migrations and Homes in the Age of Growth
At the heart of this project is a central paradox of the age of globalisation: the possibility of a stable, normal life at home relies on destabilising processes of growth, expansion, and mobility.

Rural-urban and international migrations in and from the Global South are often socially conservative projects: strivings to actualize conventional ways and ideas of a good life. Generational continuity and reproduction are central to such dreams of a normal life. Becoming an adult man in Egypt is a path of largely pre-determined steps such as financial independence, housing, marriage, offspring, and their education. This is the prime nexus of social reproduction, and at the same time also the context where generational shifts and transformations are likely to occur. “Stability” (istiqrar) describes the dream of completing these steps and being able to rest. Those steps reproduce moral ideals of the society, and yet their completion under conditions of growth and mobility also results in social change from one generation to another.

This project follows trajectories of men and fewer women from northern Egypt to sites of migration in Arab Gulf states (especially Dubai) and in Europe. Much of their home region will become uninhabitable by the end of the 21st century due to climate change. At the same time, most of them invest their savings into homes in their regions of origin. Aim of this project is to understand how people from regions like northern Egypt live with such and other contradictions that they cannot solve. At the focus of inquiry are three complications: To build a good life at home, it is often necessary migrate; stability in a capitalist economy requires growth, which is an unstable state; and spiritual, moral and economic values and strivings are part of the same reality but often cannot be reconciled.

The first phase of the project was funded by Fritz Thyssen Foundation from 2020 to 2022. The second phase since 2023 aims at the completion of two peer-reviewed articles and a monography with the title The Dream of Stability. Structured in four parts, the book follows the movement of people from rural regions into urban careers; the predicament and opportunities of migrant jobseekers in Dubai during the Covid-19 pandemic; the moral binary between a family home in one’s region of origin and the migrant accommodation; and the dialectic relation between spectacular accomplishments and the unacknowledged work, energy, and parallel lives that are necessary to generate them. This dialectic emerges as a key means of living with unsolved conflicts.


Future Building in Central Asia: Intergenerational Cooperation, Infrastructure, and Translocal Mobilities
This project is a comparative study on elderly care, translocal mobilities, and future building in the Soviet and post-Soviet Central Asian contexts. The project investigates the process through which elderly care is provided in different types of kin relationships in the region, together with a historical perspective on how it has changed in the period from Soviet to post-Soviet (1991 and onwards), which marked the transition from Soviet Rule to independent nation-states. For instance, during the Soviet period, the authorities attempted to limit certain types of kin ties, which have since been revived after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union also provided many kinds of state-led institutional care which have now, because of increased mobility in the region, taken new forms and practices. Migrant remittance is one such.

A necessary focus of my research is on Fergana Valley, as this is an area shared by Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan, alongside Mecca (Saudi Arabia), which therefore allows us to study a regional practice at the intersection of territorial nationalities. Fergana Valley has a high influx of emigration from the region to Russia, and therefore provides a particularly good insight into the research questions around remittances and their expenditure for hajj pilgrimages to Mecca. Investigating these contexts will help to generate valid empirical data on 1) the intergenerational support of translocal families; 2) different benefits (or lack of) from the remittances leading to investments in infrastructure, education, hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, and the translocal mobilities of elders.

Central to my research, conducted in several localities over months, will be the collection of anthropological and historical data for understanding strategies of the local elderly people adopted for building a ‘future’ for their children in Central Asia.


Suspension: Dust Wind in Iran under Sanctions


Migrant arrival contexts in transregional comparison. Local figurations and differing collective histories of Assyrians/Arameans in Germany and Jordan
This comparative project investigates the development of we-images, mutual disregard or conflicts between migrants of a higher “social age” and newcomers of the same ethno-religious grouping. Taking the example of Assyrian/Aramean migrants it compares their histories of settling/settlement and their incorporation in local figurations with “old-established” and other migrant groupings. It also explores the consequences of renewed influx of members of the same grouping in the same local arrival contexts. The project puts a focus on the significance of differing collective histories, collective memories and nationalities of migrants already present and those moving in.

The analysis of two local arrival contexts of Assyrians/Arameans in Eastern Westphalia (Germany) and in Amman (Jordan) is representative of figurations of migrant groupings which are influenced to this day by processes of state-building and violent conflicts in the Middle East. In roughly the past two decades Assyrian/Aramean migrants from Iraq and Syria have moved to Eastern Westphalia and Amman. However, in both contexts there is a long-established community of migrants who have considered themselves as Assyrians/Arameans for decades – in Germany mainly Turkish-speaking, in Amman mainly Arabic-speaking.

The focus of the project is on the following questions:

In the light of complex local figurations and options of belonging, to what extent do the members of the local grouping of Assyrians/Arameans develop we-images which are connected to the formation of a local “community”?
To what extent does a renewed influx of migrants with differing collective histories lead to transformations of we-images and of everyday life, to internal differentiation and conflicts?
These two central aspects – complex local figurations and differing collective histories – are connected. They show which role similar and different historical perspectives play in processes of (not) getting together, and how this leads to changes in figurations with members of further migrant or old-established groupings. The methodological approach, a combination of sociological biographical research and figurational sociology, sharpens our view of the socio-historical dimensions of the topic and avoids an atomistic focus on one grouping. By examining the definition, size and composition of migrant groupings in their dynamics, the project makes an important conceptual contribution to processes of social boundary-making and to the analysis of internal differentiations in migrant groupings using a comparative approach.


A New History of Infectious Diseases in the Southern Red Sea Region


Internal Labour Migration in Central Asia, 1870-1917: Social Drivers and Government Impediments to Movement


In the Company of Plants: Multispecies Care and Migrant Home-making in Germany
This project looks into the relationships different waves and generations of Turkish migrants develop with the plants they grow and care for in Germany, in order to shed light onto the significance of multispecies networks in the processes of home-making and integration. It starts with the understanding that social processes always necessitate the collaboration of nonhuman actors. Plants accompany people in their struggles of home-making in new environments and they share their challenges of acclimatization and adaptation. They are also carriers of meanings and memories related to belonging. While caring for their plants, migrants invest in rooting and turning a foreign place into home. Understanding how this happens requires being attentive to the intimate relationship between the migrants and their plants, as well to the ethics of care that shapes these relationships.


Slavery and Post-Slavery in South Yemen under British rule
This project sheds light on the history of slavery in Yemen and its lasting repercussions. During the British protectorate in South Yemen (1872 - 1963), Western and local concepts and practices of slavery and its abolition collided, with complex societal consequences. The aim of this project is to analyse how categories of (un)freedom, social hierarchy and race were formed and reinterpreted, and how these processes affected (formerly) enslaved people and their descendants. The interdisciplinary approach of this project combines methodological and theoretical tools from anthropology and history, as well as research on slavery, gender, and race. Intersectionality is central to my analysis of different factors of inequality in (post-)slavery experiences. 


Bahari yetu (Our ocean/genre) – A Matrifocal Anthropological Study of Oral Archives and Embodied Knowledge Practices Along the Swahili Coast
This research project takes as a point of departure the Swahili concept of bahari, which means “genre” and “ocean” at the same time, in order to explore knowledge practices on the Northern Swahili coast through a matrifocal ethnographic lens. The project examines oral art, i.e. music and dance performances, called ngoma, as sites of knowledge. Ngoma performances are not only sites for cultural, political, religious and historical cognition, but are, in the first place, sites of social, ethical, philosophical, linguistic and rhetorical education. In the pursuit of understanding Swahili notions and concepts of knowledge, I propose to unravel how ideas of oral literary genres shed light on the specific ways of becoming, being and moving in this part of the Western Indian Ocean. I will achieve this through an in-depth analysis of the ways in which local experts and specialists, such as healers, teachers, poets, oral art performers and curators collect, preserve, transmit, utilise, produce and perform various oral and textual Swahili knowledge genres (bahari).

As in pre-dominantly oral societies, theoretical and practical knowledge are closely intertwined, this inquiry includes the study of original Swahili occupations such as navigation (land and sea), healing, composing, carving and weaving. Through a matrifocal lens that counters the “patriarchal bias in [the] understanding and interpretation of African data” (Amadiume 2011:152 f.), I direct the overall focus of the project towards female-based cognizance and matriarchal elements in Swahili society – an omission that has so far only been explicitly addressed by Kelly Askew (1999). This also serves to centre female-generated moral and political philosophy, to study Muslim societies as matri- and not patrifocal settings, and to contribute to an active non-Eurocentric recognition of other ways of knowing and perceiving reality (i.e. time, history, space and place).

The research also contributes to an empirically-grounded conceptualisation of knowledge by including local experts and actors as collaborative colleagues in the project evolvement.


Precarious Half-Lives: Co-habiting with Radiation and Ignorance in Mailuu-Suu, Kyrgyzstan
Mailuu-Suu, a former uranium mining town in southern Kyrgyzstan, to this day deals with the legacy of the Soviet military-industrial complex—and in particular of the Soviet nuclear programme. Between 1946 and its closure in 1968, Mailuu-Suu’s uranium mining and milling combine produced 10,000 tons of yellowcake, a partially refined form of uranium that is used as fuel in nuclear power stations and constitutes an intermediate step in the production of nuclear weapons. But the combine also generated three million cubic meters of radioactive residues, which were piled in slag heaps in the open air or were buried in tailings dumps scattered around the mountainous area surrounding the town. Consequently, earthquakes, landslides, floods, and mud-torrents have over the years resulted in a significant volume of heavy metals and radionuclides with long half-lives contaminating groundwater and even seeping into the Mailuu-Suu River that flows through the town. Physicians agree that it is probably as a result of these conditions that Mailuu-Suu records unusually high rates of birth defects, miscarriages, and stillbirths, as well as a number of cancer patients two times the national average.

This project explores the various processes of environmental (un)knowing that inform the locals’ living in a town that, despite still ongoing remediation work, continues to constitute a health hazard. In this direction, the project critically approaches the knowledge transfer mechanisms and practices initiated by environmental NGOs and international organisations, arguing that the personal considerations of those tasked with knowledge dissemination lead to the recalibration of scientific norms and reinterpretation of risks, which in turn make environmental and health hazards “acceptable” and the situation “normal.” The project also shows that normalisation is sought by the locals themselves, as the adverse socio-economic conditions brought by the Soviet Union’s dissolution and the town’s subsequent de-industrialisation hinder most of them from leaving Mailuu-Suu. Locals then turn to their own convictions and religious beliefs to find coping mechanisms such that help them reinterpret their contaminated surroundings and even swap their “precarious half-lives” for a semblance of normal life.

The history of Mailuu-Suu is also an important part of the project. Both the town’s founding in the early 1940s and its transition from mining town to industrial centre were covered by secrecy and involved the institutionalisation of regimes of ignorance that kept most locals in the dark. By delving into archival material and collecting oral history interviews with former uranium miners, the project sheds light onto the long history of environmental injustice that has characterised not only Mailuu-Suu, but in fact all Central Asian uranium mining towns, thus providing a snippet into uranium production in the Soviet Union.


Highly-Qualified Syrian Circassian Refugees in Multicultural Capitals of Amsterdam and Berlin: Challenges and Opportunities
Ongoing global conflicts, natural disasters, and the rise of nationalism and authoritarianism have led to significant displacement around the world. According to the UNHCR, the Syrian war, which began in 2011, has forcibly displaced over 12 million people. Furthermore, the earthquakes in February 2023 affected 8.8 million individuals, destroying homes and displacing even more people. Turkey, which hosted around 4 million Syrian refugees, signed the 'EU-Turkey Refugee Deal' in 2016, exchanging refugee management for financial aid from Europe. Neighbouring countries such as Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon have hosted approximately 2 million Syrian refugees, while 1 million have resettled in European countries. This research argues that highly skilled forced migrants or refugees, such as scholars or journalists, often struggle to maintain their competitive edge in new host countries. For instance, some displaced associate professors seek recognition of their qualifications as equivalent to a 'habilitation' in Germany or Austria. However, the European academic structure rarely enables displaced scholars to secure full-time professorships due to limited positions. This dilemma also affects postdoctoral researchers, with many forced to leave academia after 12 years. Precarious situations, like those experienced by the 'Mittelbau,' impact displaced and refugee scholars who rely on short-term scholarships. Nonetheless, some may secure longer-term funding if they demonstrate strong publication records, particularly through DFG or ERC grants. This cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research aims to investigate the life journeys, work trajectories, labour market integration, and societal participation of highly qualified Syrian Circassian refugees, displaced for the fourth time, in two multicultural capitals: Berlin and Amsterdam. The study will explore multiple displacements, Circassian diaspora networks and their solidarity mechanisms, and the challenges faced by these refugees. The research seeks to understand how these networks contribute to their labour market integration and societal participation while identifying the challenges encountered along the way.


Knowledge, Temporalities and Questions of Justice. Negotiating Coastal Futures in West Africa in Times of Climate Change
This project seeks to explore how climate change informs coastal planning and development in Senegal, West Africa, and the knowledge(s), predictions, narratives and movements involved. Consequences of global warming are already affecting livelihoods in West Africa, leading to an entanglement of 'actual' experience and model-based predictions of rising sea levels, salinization of river estuaries and declining fish stocks. At the same time, both international and regional actors like Morocco, in its role as a 'leader' in green development, are trying to "mainstream" climate mitigation and adaptation into the process of planning and coastal and regional development, altering regional economic dynamic and negotiating different development paths. Drawing on theory and methods from Political Ecology, Environmental Anthropology and Science and Technology, this project aims at studying these developments to explore the relation between different forms of knowledge(s) related to climate change, imaginaries of the future and the material infrastructures, practices and movements they inform as.


Agrochemical Transformations and their Knowledge Resources in Egypt, 1882-1952


The Aftermath of Hope: Defeat, Recovery and Dreams In Post Counter Revolutionary Egypt


Between Family Love and Formalities: On intra-family negotiations of citizenship constructions, belonging and acts of citizenship of mixed-status families in Jordan


The Cardamom Chronicles - Scent, Savour, and Social Worlds in a Global Spice Chain


Socio-Economic Positioning and Class Making in the Context of Transnational Forced Migration. Somali Refugees in Kenya and Germany


Syrian Parents in Berlin and Istanbul: Gendered perspectives on strategies of childrearing, educational choices and intergenerational relationships