State and Society
This programme area examines how social groups, movements, and networks create, represent, and challenge state and society in their respective regional contexts. In particular, it seeks to explore the factors that contribute to the transformation of social orders. The programme area emphasizes historical analysis, even if it is fundamentally interdisciplinary in nature.

Two research perspectives are at the centre of the discussion: one, a bottom-up perspective which pays attention to local practices and interpretations, and two, the role of memory and memory-culture in the constitution and contestation of social orders.  

The first perspective focuses on local ideas of the state, statehood, and other institutional forms of social and political order, some of which differed greatly from the ideas of centralized state or international actors. The focus is less on discourse analysis than on concrete practices that shape relationships between different groups and between these groups and the state. The translocal approach enables the programme area to understand processes of constitution and disruption of states, nations, and other social and political groups and orders.

Memory and the culture of remembrance enables to explore the wider forms of social engagement with the state, both at the time of constitution of and contestation over state practices as well as retrospectively. The memory of successful, or retrospectively idealized or failed communities or states will play just as important a role as the memory of experienced or perceived (in)justice. Researchers explore how memory is activated to achieve political or civil society mobilization, which in turn is linked to questions that are central to local practices of state functioning and legitimation of a particular social order.

The twin approach helps connect larger group projects with individual ones to develop a productive dialogue within the programme area.


Historical Icons and Representations of the Past
This project examines the making, utilization and impact of the construction of role models in late colonial and post-colonial India. At the center of its inquiry are historical personalities who have been iconized as models. The project emphasizes the process of the making of such figures, which are based on a recourse to history, linking different temporalities to one another, thereby creating references between present and absent times (Landwehr). A central concern is to work out the linkages between role-model constructions and their ensuing historical images (Geschichtsbilder) on the one hand, and, unpacking expectations of an idealized future that are attached to them on the other. The project explores the socio-political conditions under which a historical personality is assigned or denied the epithet of a role model as well as the corresponding motivations behind such processes. How and with which means is the making of icons implemented? This objective not only requires an examination of the producers and recipients of the constructed historical icon but also necessitates investigations into the role of media and materiality. Competing narratives in textual sources are evaluated along with visual material or objects and monuments.

The overarching research questions include: What is the relationship between historical documentation and evidence-based knowledge on the one hand and alienation, transfiguration, heroization on the other? What objectives do historical role models serve for both producers and recipients and how does their story change from an individual biography to a universal source of morality and action? Which processes of valuing, revaluing or devaluing the past become the foundational basis for dealing with role models?


An Oasis Facing Globalisation: The History and Development of Hegra (Saudi Arabia) since the late 19th Century
This project investigates the past 150 years of an oasis which has for centuries been a major station of caravan routes in the north-western Arabian Peninsula. It zooms in on two major transformative events which have reconfigured the relationship of the oasis, its Bedouin neighbours and statehood. The first of these events is the establishment of the Hejaz railway in the early 20th century, the second the current development of the oasis as a major centre for tourism and culture. The project investigates these histories, as well as their representation in local memory and historiography.


Learning to Feel Like a Nation: Nationalism and Emotions in Turkish School Books
How do we learn to think, feel, and act as a member of a nation? How does the sense of national belonging become a part of our common sense? This project explores these hitherto understudied questions by investigating the dynamics of instilling national sentiments into children’s minds in Turkish schools. It analyzes national(ist) narratives in primary- and secondary-school textbooks, which represent the historical and contemporary sociopolitical reality from a nation-centered perspective.

The project focuses on Turkey as a highly-informative case due to its centralized school system, and the unquestionable dominance of a nationalist ideology. It deals especially with the last four decades (1980–2020), during which the country has experienced a transition from a military-overseen secular political regime to an Islamic-conservative one. This enables the researcher to observe continuity, as well as change, in national(ist) narratives during this period of seemingly significant sociopolitical transformation.

By bringing together empirical, methodological, and conceptual contributions from the sociology of knowledge, the history and sociology of emotions, cognitive science, narratology, and nationalism studies, this project aims at shedding new light on the influence of nationalism on our individual and collective minds.


After Authoritarianism: How political thinking travels with Syrians to Germany and Denmark
Focusing on Syrian refugees in Germany and Denmark, the project investigates how memories of life under authoritarian rule in Syria impact subject-formation in new political and social contexts. It does so by exploring how Syrians draw parallels to Syria when they navigate in relation to legal frameworks and authorities in host states.

The project heuristically conceptualizes comparison, exemplification and framing as three key ways in which Syrians activate memories of Syria. In extension of this conceptualization, it examines how specific comparisons shine a new light on what is compared, how examples make it possible to think the general through the particular and how framing enables focus but also limits what comes into view.

The project builds on ethnographic fieldwork among Syrians in Germany and Denmark and aims to develop new knowledge of the processes through which refugees become specific kinds of political subjects in relation to their host communities.


An Anthropological Study of the Impact and Repercussions of Chinese BRI projects in Coastal Kenya
This PhD study seeks to examine the impact and repercussions of recent Chinese Belt-and-Road-Initiative (BRI) projects in Coastal Kenya. The study focuses on major Chinese infrastructure projects including a) the modern standard – gauge railroad (SGR) from coastal city of Mombasa to Nairobi, Kenya’s capital city and b) a deep-water seaport near the historical port-town of Lamu, aimed to serve neighboring landlocked Ethiopia and Southern Sudan. The SGR railroad project (completed in 2018) in fact implemented the cessation of the usage of Mombasa’s deep-sea port for the clearance of all goods and commodities – these were now to be cleared far upcountry in Naivasha. This has aroused a plethora of destructive effects on the income situations and daily lives of coastal residents who used to be reliant on activities around Mombasa port. This project follows related questions and examines multiple ways local residents and communities have been affected by these projects.

The study focuses on the unfolding repercussions and investigates it in its wider historical and political context, especially with a view to Kenya-China relationships. It pursues ethnographic fieldwork, following the perspectives of regional residents, and uses archival work, grounded theory, urban anthropology, and transregional fieldwork in China - in order to connect with all the respective relevant perspectives and narratives. The study focuses on disruption of livelihoods of the coastal population and related forms of disorientation(s). It builds on a strong sense of familiarity with local experiences (among coastals) and transregional visions and interactions (of/with the Chinese), while using translocality and the image of ‘translocal entanglements’ as a heuristic analytic lens.


Modern Indian Literature in Translation in the GDR – Between Ideology, Censorship and Cultural Diplomacy
This project considers translations from modern Indian languages, including Indian English, which were published in the GDR in a field of tension between ideology and cultural diplomacy. With reference to the official framework of publishing in the GDR, which was characterised by the institutionalised practice of censorship, the discourse on the political-ideological evaluation of the text and the author is analysed. In addition, the literary and aesthetic evaluation of the texts is of interest, especially with regard to a postulated ideal of an “international contemporary literature” acceptable for the “Leseland” / “reading country” GDR. Between 1963 and 1990, there were a total of ca. 45 such translations from Indian languages, which were initially often mediated via English or Russian.

Two case studies are planned: one deals with the discourse that accompanied the politically motivated publication of translations of Tagore’s literary works for the centenary celebrations, while another focuses on controversial translations from the entire period under consideration. The role of the actors – publishers’ editors, reviewers, translators and cultural functionaries - will also be considered. I assume that the analyses of the evaluations of literary works from modern South Asian languages will show that they reflect political developments in the GDR, internal cultural policy and bilateral relations between India and the GDR. This will shed light on the role of translations in the cultural diplomacy of the GDR towards India before the political recognition of the GDR and on the growing autonomy of literary experts and their evaluations from the early 1970s onwards. In this way, I hope to situate these published translations within the broader framework of the entangled relations of South Asia and the GDR in the fields of literature, culture and politics.


Changing Structures of Violence during the Territorial Expansion of the British Company-State in Bengal
In political philosophy, debates on violence usually presuppose the existence of a monopoly on violence on the side of the state. From Bodin and Hobbes to Weber the state is characterised as the only legitimate bearer of the power to use physical force. Different players try to achieve this monopoly by claiming (most of the times violently) and constantly legitimizing it or by challenging the existing power holders. But what about structures of legitimacy which neither fit the state of pure chaos, where one actor rises victoriously nor the binary opposition between an established power holder and a challenger?

In eighteenth-century Britain and the Indian subcontinent, a monopoly on violence was non-existent while there was also no state of nature where human life is “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short” (Hobbes). Rulers granted different rights to non-state or local actors, who had different responsibilities towards the population. This can be more accurately described as a multilayered structure of sovereignty, which was fluid and constantly changing. In such a structure, the right to exercise physical force is continuously questioned, negotiated and adapted.

In my research, I will trace the changes in the structure of violence in Bengal after the Battle of Palasi in 1757 and the territorial expansion of the East India Company (EIC). How did the EIC navigate in the already existing structure of sovereignty and how did it change this structure? What effects did these changes have on practices of everyday violence? Who exercised the violence and who was targeted? Can this violence be described as colonial violence? If yes, what are the characteristics of this form of colonial violence?

On the one hand, this research aims to critically engage with the philosophical debates on sovereignty and (colonial) violence. On the other hand, it sheds light on changing forms of everyday violence in colonial India.


Crafting Entanglements: Afro-Asian Pasts of the Global Cold War (CRAFTE)
In the history of the Cold War, the global South often appears only as a theater of bloc politics between the East and West. Recent research has taken note of voices from Africa and Asia, yet little is known about their interconnections. To shed light on these, this project, conducted by Dr. Anandita Bajpai, engages with students’ and women's networks, media entanglements enabled by radio stations and film festivals, and the divided city of Berlin as an arena of South-South interconnections. The focus will be on the entangled trajectories of Asian and African actors and how these were embedded in, but also, how they shaped the global Cold War. The aim is to contribute to a more inclusive historiography by relying on the framework of global-entangled histories.


Entangled Wavelengths: International Radio Broadcasters & their Afro-Asian Listening Publics
This sub-project zooms into media entanglements across the Asian and African continents, which were enabled by international radio broadcasting in the Cold War years. Instead of focussing on the broadcasting or host countries of the stations (usually based in Euro-America or the Soviet Union), the key research 'sites' of the project are the places where the stations were heard. Although not intended as such by the stations, international broadcasting programmes enabled several listeners from Asian and African contexts to be informed of, engage, build networks, and initiate epistolary exchanges with each other.  Following traces in radio archives, listeners' private collections and their oral testimonies, the project explores the nature of such entanglements and the possibilities listeners imagined them to offer.

This research emerges from a Habilitation project (thesis for qualifying as lecturer in Germany), which traces the affective trajectories of international radio broadcasters and their listening publics in India during the Cold War years. It explores radio’s material legacies by exclusively focussing on the social lives of radio-objects, which travelled between foreign broadcasting stations and their Indian listeners during the Cold War years. The presence of objects such as gifts, souvenirs, letters, photographs, radio journals, and a variety of radio-memorabilia in listeners’ homesteads/private collections even today and their affective relationship(s) to them can enable us to examine how radio materially permeated the larger social fabric of listeners’ everyday lives, not just through sound but also a plethora of things. In other words, I follow the trajectories of radio-objects to explore what a material history of radio could look like, how things unravel radio-pasts as sites of South-South entanglements and how radio-objects become windows to keepers’ biographies.

Field work for this project has been conducted in several towns, villages and medium-sized cities in the Indian states of Bihar (2018-19), Rajasthan (2022), Uttar Pradesh (2022, 2024), Haryana (2024) and Chattisgarh (2024). 

Based on leads from this research, the sub-project within CRAFTE advances in two directions:

1. Tracing the Afro-Asian listeners' networks which were made possible by international broadcasting stations. This part of the research relies on Indian listeners as its nodal point of South-South networks. In focus is (a) how Indian listeners' expressed solidarity with anti-colonial, nationalist movements in African countries, or opposed the Apartheid regime in South Africa, and US interventions in Vietnam via radio and (b) how radio journals opened new networks of epistolary exchanges between Indian listeners and listeners from Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania, Mauritius, South Africa, Uganda etc.

2. Exploring the limits of Afro-Asian solidarities in moments of crisis: This part will focus on the expulsion of Ugandan Asians from the country in 1972. How did different radio stations report on the expulsion? How were listening publics explained the same in different geopolitical contexts?


The Global South and the Global Cold War in Berlin – the Divided City as a Locale for African-Asian-Solidarities
This subproject explores Afro-Asian actors in divided Berlin from 1961 to 1990, adopting a localized long-term perspective. It examines how local divisions, political bloc integration, and South-South solidarities intersect, with a focus on the interplay between globalized discourses and the everyday practices of racialization.

The project explores the connection between the Berlin Wall's division and the mobility of Afro-Asian actors, questioning the often-presumed closed nature of the Wall. The project highlights how the Wall functioned as both a local and international symbol, deeply embedded in specific political contexts. Additionally, the research examines the state's proclaimed solidarity with the Global South alongside the everyday racialization experienced by marginalized people. It seeks to analyze this tension and its implications for solidarities between different groups facing exclusion and marginalization.

The research is divided into three interrelated dimensions:

The International Level: Diplomacy in East and West and the “Berlin Question”
This dimension investigates the diplomatic significance of divided Berlin within the UN and other international organizations (e.g., COMECON) and examines how the city was leveraged to build solidarities for other struggles. These were not merely symbolic acts but involved tangible support, including financial aid for the ANC, political asylum, and health guarantees. Similar commitments extended to anti-colonial and anti-racist movements in Mozambique and Angola, with close diplomatic ties to the GDR, which later facilitated the arrival of contract workers. This example illustrates the paradox between the GDR’s official anti-racist stance and its pervasive everyday racism, revealing tensions in the state’s public and private narratives.
 
The Divided City as a Space of Mobility for Afro-Asian Actors
This layer examines Berlin as both a material and political space where systemic competition created opportunities for mobility and agency for Afro-Asian actors. This part of the project focuses on the lived experiences of individuals, such as patients in the Solidarity Ward "Jakob Morenga," and other sites of encounter between diverse groups. 
 
Biographical Approaches: Narratives of Afro-Asian Descent
Through biographical interviews, I trace locations and memories of contact with the East and moments of solidarities/or anti-solidarty between afro-Asian actors.. I plan to explore these deeply personal narratives, now preserved in oral history projects, to expand the archival focus on the GDR’s international history beyond institutional memory. This dimension connects private lives to larger geopolitical and historical frameworks, adding depth to the study of Afro-Asian actors in Berlin.


Women's Internationalism(s) and Afro-Asian Networks: Cultural politics and Cold War in India
This project explores women’s internationalism(s) during the Cold War by particularly focusing on Indian wormen's Afro-Asian solidarity networks. Engaging with one particular organisation, Women’s International Democratic Federation (WIDF), it delves into how women from Asia and Africa shaped the organisation and how especially Indian actors utilised it as a platform to both shape their internationalist visions and craft the women’s rights movement in India.

The project explores Afro-Asianism and its manifestations in the Indian context by particularly focussing on women's role in forging Afro-Asian solidarity networks. It traces the lives of  Indian women, who held important posts in the Women’s International Democratic Federation (WIDF). First founded in Paris in 1945, the WIDF was banned in France and moved to East Berlin in 1951. By closely following the trajectories of the organization's Indian members, the project engages with their activism in their own country, in such international organisations, and the networks they formed with women from the Global South. ​

The study explores how these women, while negotiating local and global issues of marginalisation, exploitation and inequality, were also performing a new worldview of internationalism(s), cosmopolitanism(s) and solidarities through protests, conferences, meetings and celebrations. It delves into how women’s societal roles as mothers, workers and citizens were being reimagined in an anti-war, anti imperialist and anti-racial worldview. At the same time, it will also uncover the limits and afterlives of these solidarities to see if, then how, international solidarity translated into local practice.


Student Networks and Trajectories
The project traces the lived realities of "Afro-Asian students" and trainees during the Cold War. Building on work on Afro-Asian students in the GDR and FRG, the project aims to show how these actors were integrated into networks and institutional and administrative frameworks, and what resources they used to influence these in return - not as passive recipients of global bloc politics, but as translocal actors who transcended traditional readings of East-West, North-South and centre-periphery. The focus lies on the social, political and cultural curricula which guided and shaped these young people and their future lives.

The research traces the stations a young person coming to one of the German states for educational purposes would have undergone - from developing the intention to go abroad, to deciding weather or not to return to the old or remain in the new home once the intended education programme finished. A particular focus lies on the groups and networks such a person might have been situated in - student unions, political organisations, performance groups, editorial boards - as well as the social, cultural, and political curricula accompanying their formal education.

Following these steps and connections, the project will unearth the entangled identity/ies of the individual, that might connect them to ideas of nation, region, ideology, religion, culture, love, family, and other forms of belonging. In addition, the comparison of similar stations in the life of people who are of similar age and share the stated intention of educating themselves abroad, but are dispersed across different temporal and systemic contexts, allows conclusions regarding the cultural, political, and societal conditions of the time.


In Pursuit of ‘Legality’ and ‘Justice’. Minority Struggles in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union
What did Muslim and Jewish groups in the Russian Empire, and Crimean Tatars, Chechens, Armenians, and other national groups under Soviet rule expect when they called on ‘justice’ and ‘legality’? And what did they achieve?

While there is no set definition of the ‘rule of law’, with over half a dozen indices competing for recognition, the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union would not score high on any of these. And yet, the notions of 'legality' (zakonnost’) and 'justice' (spravedlivost’) greatly mattered in both. Led by PD Dr. Stefan B. Kirmse, this ERC-funded project explores the ways in which ethnic and religious minorities, from the Russian Empire’s ‘Great Reforms’ of the 1860s to the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, routinely employed ‘legality’ and ‘justice’ to further and enforce their rights. In dialogue with local partners in six Soviet successor states, it looks at minority actors from both ‘above’ and ‘below’, as participants in policy-making and public debate, as judges and litigants, and as local activists.


Culture on Trial I: Russian Colonialism, Georgian Jews, and the Trans-local His- tory of Blood Libel, 1850–1914
Kirmse’s research revolves around two distinct projects: The first, “Culture on Trial I: Russian Colonialism, Georgian Jews, and the Trans-local History of Blood Libel, 1850–1914”, analyzes a series of criminal trials in late imperial Russia that placed “culture” on trial, albeit indirectly. These cases revolved around accusations against non-Russian defendants of ritual crimes, highlighting the intersections of culture and legal narratives. By investigating notable cases such as the little-known Surami and Kutaisi blood libels in Georgia (1851–1853 and 1878–1880), in which Georgian Jews stood accused of murdering a Christian girl; the Multan ritual murder case in the Volga-Kama region (1893–1895); and the Beilis affair in Kiev (1911–1913), which caught national and international attention, this project will reveal how both the authorities and the accused leveraged the ideas of legality and justice in their accusations and defence.


Culture on Trial II: Everyday ‘Crime’ in Central Asia. The Imperial, Soviet and Post-Soviet States Dealing with Bride Kidnapping and the Payment of Bride Price, 1860–Present
The second research project, “Culture on Trial II: Everyday ‘Crime’ in Central Asia. The Imperial, Soviet and Post-Soviet States Dealing with Bride Kidnapping and the Payment of Bride Price, 1860–Present”, shifts the focus to the sociocultural practice of bride kidnapping and the payment of bride price in Central Asia, surveying their implications from the tsarist era through the Soviet period and into contemporary times. This research will examine how these practices, at times outlawed as “traditional crimes”, have been variously contested, accommodated and ultimately revived in modern society, providing a lens through which to analyze their endurance and transformation over time.


Legal Nationalism: Strategies of Seeking Justice in Post-Stalinist Armenian SSR
Gevorg Avetikyan, a postdoctoral researcher and annual fellow in JUSTIMINO project, takes a broader look at the concept of “socialist legality”, focusing on Armenian activists in the post-Stalinist era who, like many others, were granted their own national territory in the 1920s, in the research project “Legal Nationalism: Strategies of Seeking ‘Justice’ in the Post-Stalinist Armenian SSR”. The fact that ethnic Armenians enjoyed certain privileges in the Armenian SSR did not deter them from pursuing “justice” campaigns. Instead, it fostered a demand for broad civic freedoms in their republic, leading to a range of protests, from small intellectual circles to mass demonstrations. By the mid-1960s, their activism encompassed calls for a proper recognition and memorialization of the Armenian genocide, the teaching of Armenian history and the redrawing of borders (inspired in part by Lavrentii Beria’s territorial claims). Although some activities were deemed illegal and faced prosecution, many activists adopted a strategy of civil obedience, viewing their national and Soviet identities as compatible. Their advocacy was framed not only in terms of justice but also through the lens of legality, as they were aware of their rights and sought to test their boundaries. Avetikyan will explore various campaigns for “national rights” in Armenia, contextualizing them within the rise of nationalisms in post-Stalinist Soviet society. This investigation reveals interconnected histories: national activism was prominent across many union republics, fostering imitation and learning, while Armenian activism was also bolstered by internationalist initiatives that highlighted both national and global dimensions, as well as a strong diaspora.


Return to Norms: Stefania Shabatura and the Ukrainian Shistdesiatnyky
Lucien Turczan-Lipets is investigating Soviet dissidents in the project “Return to Norms: Stefania Shabatura and the Ukrainian Shistdesiatnyky”. The Shistdesiatnyky (“60s generation”), a notable age cohort of Soviet Ukrainian intellectuals, played a pivotal role in the revival of Ukrainian national culture during the 1960s. Many Shistdesiatnyky, born in the 1930s, regarded themselves as products of the Soviet educational system. Their rediscovery of Ukrainian culture did not inherently mean a rejection of Russian culture or socialist ideologies; rather, they were acutely aware of the intricate historical ties between Russians and Ukrainians. While they vehemently condemned the Russian chauvinism that had endured since the tsarist era, they harboured aspirations for democratic reforms within the Soviet Union. Among the significant figures in this discourse is Stefania Shabatura, a textile artist, dissident and political prisoner. Her active participation in campaigns advocating for the rights of Ukrainian political prisoners, including Valentyn Moroz, led to her expulsion from the Union of Artists of Ukraine and subsequent incarceration in a Mordovian labour camp from 1972 to 1976. Following her release and exile to a Tajik village from 1976 to 1979, Shabatura joined the Ukrainian Helsinki Group. Although she returned to Lviv in December 1979, she was barred from publicly exhibiting her work until the late 1980s.


Muslim Parliamentary Groups in the Russian State Duma, 1906–1916
Leo Hedrich focuses on Muslim experiences in matters of law-making with a project titled “Muslim Parliamentary Groups in the Russian State Duma, 1906–1916”. The research examines the dynamics among as few as six and as many as 37 deputies, representing a diverse range of ethnicities from across the Volga-Ural region, the Caucasus, Crimea and Central Asia. The representatives harnessed the language of legality, justice and past in-justices in discussions on two of the most virulent and divisive parliamentary issues in early 20th-century Russia: access to land and the regulation of migration, both from abroad and within the empire. As a result, the establishment of the Duma offered the promise of “justice” separate from the tsar and facilitated broad societal debate and competition, to which ordinary people contributed by flooding their deputies with letters and suggestions.


The Georgian Perspective on Soviet Legality and Justice: Dissident Activities and the Legacy of Stalin’s Influence (1950–1980)
Katie Sartania also investigates dissident activities in the project “The Georgian Perspective on Soviet Legality and Justice: Dissident Activities and the Legacy of Stalin’s Influence (1950–1980)”. This work poses essential questions about identity and governance, including what did and does it mean to be both Georgian and Soviet? Furthermore, how did Georgians engage with the Soviet institutional framework of nation- building? Sartania aims to illustrate Stalin’s lasting impact on Georgian national identity and its trajectory. In the aftermath of Stalin’s death in 1953, subsequent political transformations, including Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization and the suppression of pro-Stalin protests in Tbilisi in 1956, irrevocably altered the dynamics between Georgia and Moscow. The events of the late 1950s marked a decisive shift in Georgian attitudes, as the population increasingly demanded their rights as entitled nationals rather than appealing to Moscow for assistance. The quest for cultural preservation, the safeguarding of traditions and the promotion of the Georgian language emerged as central themes of this period.


Russian–Ottoman Relations and the Karaite Question in Late Imperial Russia
Aikaterini Lykoudi, postdoctoral researcher, focuses on the evolving treatment and legal activism of Karaite Jews in the Black Sea region, a distinct religious community that is neither Rabbinic nor Talmudic. The project, titled “Russian–Ottoman Relations and the Karaite Question in Late Imperial Russia”, explores their unique historical trajectory within the Russian Empire, emphasizing the Karaite Jews’ cultural distinctiveness from Judaism. Karaite activists secured recognition as a religious group in the empire in 1837, gaining some autonomy in religious and administrative affairs. Lykoudi will also address their continuous struggle in the 1860s, when Karaites were legally separated from Judaism under imperial law, a process that continued into the late 19th century. In fact, local police and administrative officials faced challenges in classifying the Karaites, who shared characteristics with both Crimean Tatars, who were subject to imperial protection, and Crimean Jews, who faced various restrictions. The Karaites present a compelling case study, demonstrating the range of strategies available to both government policymakers and local elites in the Russian Empire. Lykoudi aims to focus on Crimean, Bessarabian and Istanbul Karaites and their role in the Jewish Enlightenment (Haskalah) between the Russian and the Ottoman empires. By exploring Karaite writing on their origins and legal emancipation, by tracking their archived correspondence with governors-general and different ministries in Saint Petersburg, and by examining their involvement in local court cases, Lykoudi will shed light on the importance of “legality” and “justice” in their campaigns and thus paint a nuanced picture of their changing image and voice.


The Crimean Tatars and Experiences of Exile in Soviet Central Asia
In the project “The Crimean Tatars and Experiences of Exile in Soviet Central Asia”, postdoctoral researcher and annual fellow S aid G aziev investigates the struggles of the Crimean Tatars over a critical 30-year period culminating in the eras of glasnost’ and perestroika. This research encompasses multiple arenas, highlighting the activism of Crimean Tatars in public spaces through petitions, lawsuits and demonstrations. By tracking various legal strategies employed across numerous court cases, complaints and publications, and using sources from the State Archive of Uzbekistan, Gaziev aims to document how the first generation of Crimean Tatar activists asserted that the 1944 deportation was a violation of Soviet law. The work will also address the transformation of rehabilitation efforts into a broader international human rights movement from the late 1960s onward. The project will highlight the legal victories and challenges encountered by Crimean Tatars up to the fall of the Soviet regime.


Timely Histories: A Social History of Time in South Asia
TIMEHIST aims to write the history of time and temporal cultures in South Asia between the 1500s and the 1950s on a practice- and process-based approach to historical pasts. Covering this broad timespan under five modular units, the objective is to investigate and write the graded pasts of shifts and transformations that occurred within the temporal cultures of South Asia. In doing so, it departs from the usual approaches that focus either on the device (clock) or modern nation-state institutions such as army, school, factory, and office. Instead, while going beyond device-centrism, it puts ‘othered’ spaces of temporal practices such as field, farm, jungle, and river in the centre of the time’s history.


South Asian Nights: A History
Historically, work is seen as part of the day and the night is assumed to be the passive time for sleep. This assumption has led for long to the neglect of the history of the night, at least in the South Asian case.

Studying night as part of a social history of time poses a few fundamental questions: Was nocturnal temporality different than diurnal, and if yes, for whom and how? If control of time expressed exercise of power, how did the night confirm or configure the power established during the day? Was it necessarily the time of subversion and transgression? And finally, did the night mean the same for different social groups and along different spatial sites, primarily rural and urban?

The unit will explore the meaning of the nocturnal time, and the changes therein, at an interrelated cluster of sites that include work (prostitution and ‘nightsoil’ removal), crime (patrolling the city in the darkness), law (the role of the night in the making of the rule of law), and leisure and pleasure. The anxiety and fear of the night probably re-inscribed darkness as the colonial state from very early on tried to regulate nocturnal mobility and sociability. This aspect is of specific importance as it shows a crucial role played by the night in the conceptualisation of the ‘rule of law’, a point so far not made in South Asian legal history.

The legal regulation of the night in aspects of work and sociability, and crime and mobility must also be complemented with the examination of the moral and social articulations on the night. What was the night’s role in the making of the entity called private space or private time? While the growing use of street lighting in Europe from the 18th century extended the period of the night, did South Asia go through a similar change? My hypothesis is that the history of darkness was different between Europe and South Asia. The extent to which street lighting developed beyond presidency cities is a subject of future research. Following this, the unit will comparatively use sources – archival and literary – to compare nights in the rural and urban settings under the hypothesis that it was not just the social groups and hierarchies, technology and the state that interacted to give meaning to the night but night also was shaped differently in different spatial sites. This strand will move the story beyond the state into the realm of social engagement with the night along ideas of transgressions, romance, separation, and supernatural.


Citizenship, Labour and Temporality in Postcolonial South Asia
There is a close and deep connection between temporality and social movements. However, this relationship seems underexplored in social movement theory and history, particularly in South Asia. By examining domestic workers' movement from the 1930s to the 1960s, my project seeks to underline and demonstrate a distinct temporal underpinning. Participants used a robust temporal idiom and language to articulate their strategies and politics. In this context, trade unionism reflects a specific temporal vision for the future. This has become prominent in recent studies of climate politics, both in humanities and social sciences, and it can also provide a productive axis in research on social history and labour history. The South Asian labour history has remained silent in questions of time and temporality, and the literature has not adequately addressed these issues. So, the developmental state articulated particular visions of the future, which were at loggerheads with ideas of the future that social movements and labour movements articulated. This point warrants further reflection and research which the project intends to undertake.


Time and Delay: Gendered Temporalities in Bengal in the 19th and 20th Centuries
With a focus on late nineteenth century Bengal and early post-colonial West Bengal, this unit will use ‘delay’ as an analytical category to investigate temporal experiences along the lines of gender. Part of Timely Histories: A Social History of Time in South Asia, this research is based on three main lines of enquiry.

First, the unit looks at the nature of ‘delays’ in modes of commutation like trains and trams meant for women who took up gainful employment in the city of Calcutta (Kolkata). This will be studied in the context of how such means of commuting were often essential for them to maintain a balance between professional and personal lives. Additionally, it will explore how their experiences differed from that of men when faced with delays while using the same means of travel.

Second, in distinction but also in conjunction with the office space of work on which usually temporal histories have been mapped, the research will use the home as an alternative site to comprehend ‘gendered’ experiences of temporality. Primarily of interest will be to examine how working women negotiated the diverse calendrical systems that governed their lives at the workplace and home. 

Finally, the research will adopt a comparative methodology to account for social variations. Women who stayed back in villages would often depend on remittances sent by men of the family who went to cities for work. Understanding how such women responded to delays in receiving remittances will be a focus of this research. Whether they adopted alternative sources of livelihood as coping strategies and, if so, how they fared in relation to the type of jobs taken up by their urban counterparts will be one main area of investigation.


Light and Nocturnal-time: Materiality and Material Practices of Early Modern Nights in Mughal South Asia
As part of Timely Histories: A Social History of Time in South Asia, the unit focuses on early modern nights in Mughal South Asia as its principal theme of investigation. Existing narratives on early modern India predominantly treat daytime as the main temporal framework for exploring historical processes. Reassessing the familiar history of diurnality, the inquiry shifts the focus on nocturnality by situating it at the intersection of material culture and textual practices of the Mughal empire (16th-18th centuries).

It will explore night as a ‘social’ category where realms of power, technology of production, labour and object-practices coalesced in rendering the nightly functions of the expansive polity. Firstly, taking into consideration the spiritual and metaphoric domain of light and darkness, it would recast itself in the material preserve of the night-time by foregrounding the production and consumption patterns of pre-colonial lighting objects. A variegated range of Mughal illuminants, in their diversified physical and cultural forms would be examined for understanding objects’ deployment practices and circulatory mechanisms that became intrinsic to the nocturnal realities of the period. The role of imperial patronage and expanding commercial networks fostering the courtly ceremonies, religious gatherings, intellectual assemblies, social festivities, travel, economic transactions, hunting expeditions and military partaking would remain central in reevaluating early modern nights as unproductive or dormant. Secondly, it would focus on nights’ ecological dependence in growing and procuring of raw materials such as cotton, wax and oil. Charting the agricultural cultivation of oil-seeds, technology of oil-extraction and procurement-process of forest products such as beeswax, the unit attempts to recover the labour processes buttressing the nocturnal economy and craft-mechanism of Mughal illuminations. Colonial encounters and the role of local merchants as well as the European companies’ factors would also help navigate the demand-supply and circulation networks of the luminous objects.  The mutual dependence and reciprocity of night and objects would further earmark the inquiry. Amplifying the same, the material world of early modern nights would be further examined through reconsidering darkness and lightened nights as time-units where acts of theft, looting, highway robberies, fire-accidents belied their celebratory and sensorial character. Bringing a corpus of Indo-Persian sources and colonial records in conversation with each other, the unit attempts to demonstrate the material world of early modern nocturnal culture in Mughal South Asia through a close study of unpublished textual and archival records.


Digitization and Heritage Protection: Ghadames as a Laboratory of Community-Based and Collaborative Strategies
This project, based at Leibniz-Zentrum Moderner Orient in Berlin and supported by the Patrimonies Funding Initiative of the Gerda Henkel Stiftung, is developed with the University of Tripoli and the Ecole nationale d’architecture et d’urbanisme of Tunis, in cooperation with the Ghadames Association for Heritage and Conservation (Jam’iyya Ghadames lil-Turâth wal-Mahfuzât). It aims to digitize a large amount of high-value historical archives and manuscripts that have been partially saved from the rubbles of buildings in Ghadames (Libya) that were destroyed during World War II.